DBSCAN
=

The DBSCAN algorithm is based on this intuitive notion 
of “clusters” and “noise”. The key idea is that for 
each point of a cluster, the neighborhood of a given 
radius has to contain at least a minimum number of points. 

a. In which cases might it be more useful to apply?
-

Partitioning methods (K-means, PAM clustering) and hierarchical clustering work 
for finding spherical-shaped clusters or convex clusters. 
In other words, they are suitable only for compact and well-separated 
clusters. Moreover, they are also severely affected by the presence 
of noise and outliers in the data.

**Geolocation data analysis:** DBSCAN is often used to analyze datasets of geographic 
coordinates to find groups of nearby locations that may indicate the presence of 
points of interest, traffic patterns.

**Image segmentation:** DBSCAN can be used to segment images into groups of similar pixels, 
which can be useful in object recognition applications and image analysis.

**Social media analysis:** DBSCAN can be used to analyze social media datasets to 
find groups of users who share similar interests, which can be useful for market 
segmentation and personalized advertising campaigns.


b. What are the mathematical fundamentals of it?
-

- Find all the neighbor points within eps and identify the core points or visited 
with more than MinPts neighbors.
- For each core point if it is not already assigned to a cluster, create a new cluster.
- Find recursively all its density-connected points and assign them to the same 
cluster as the core point. 
A point $a$ and $b$ are said to be density connected if there exists $a$ point $c$ 
which has a sufficient number of points in its neighbors and both points $a$ and $b$ 
are within the eps distance. This is $a$ chaining process. So, if $b$ is $a$ neighbor 
of $c$, $c$ is a neighbor of $d$, and d is a neighbor of $e$, which in turn is  neighbor 
of $a$ implying that $b$ is $a$ neighbor of $a$.
- Iterate through the remaining unvisited points in the dataset. Those points 
that do not belong to any cluster are noise.

GeeksforGeeks. (2023). ML | DBSCAN Clustering in ML | Density based clustering. GeeksforGeeks. 
https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/dbscan-clustering-in-ml-density-based-clustering/


c. Is there any relation between DBSCAN and Spectral Clustering? If so, what is it?
-

DBSCAN and Spectral Clustering are different but complementary clustering algorithms. 
While DBSCAN focuses on the density and neighborhood of the data points, Spectral 
Clustering focuses on the similarity of the data points. Both algorithms can be 
used together to improve the accuracy and efficiency of clustering in large 
datasets.
